Tushar was going from Delhi to Chennai for his cousin’s wedding.
They were travelling by train and he had managed to squeeze into the window seat his nose glued to the glass pane.
As he watched trees and houses fly past his uncle tapped his shoulder and said Do you know that trains were first used about 150 years ago and that people began using buses a few decades later. Tushar wondered when people couldn’t travel quickly from one place to another did they spend their entire lives wherever they were born.
Not quite.
We know about people who lived in the subcontinent as early as two million years ago.
Today we describe them as hunter-gatherers.
The name comes from the way in which they got their food.
Generally they hunted wild animals caught fish and birds gathered fruits roots nuts seeds leaves stalks and eggs.
The immense variety of plants in a tropical land like ours meant that gathering plant produce was an extremely important means of obtaining food.
None of these things was easy to do.
There are several animals that run faster than us many that are stronger.
To hunt animals or catch fish and birds people need to be alert quick and have lots of presence of mind.
To collect plant produce you need to find out which plants or parts of plants are edible that is can be eaten as many can be poisonous.
You also need to find out about the seasons when the fruits ripen.
List the skills and knowledge that the children of these communities had.
Do you have these skills and knowledge.
There are at least four reasons why huntergatherers moved from place to place.
First if they had stayed at one place for a long time they would have eaten up all the available plant and animal resources.
Therefore they would have had to go elsewhere in search of food.
Second animals move from place to place — either in search of smaller prey or in the case of deer and wild cattle in search of grass and leaves.
That is why those who hunted them had to follow their movements.
Third plants and trees bear fruit in different seasons.
So people may have moved from season to season in search of different kinds of plants.
Fourth people plants and animals need water to survive.
Water is found in lakes streams and rivers.
While many rivers and lakes are perennial with water throughout the year others are seasonal.
People living on their banks would have had to go in search of water during the dry seasons winter and summer .
Besides people may have travelled to meet their friends and relatives.
Remember they travelled on foot.
Archaeologists have found some of the things hunter-gatherers made and used.
It is likely that people made and used tools of stone wood and bone of which stone tools have survived best.
Some uses of stone tools are given below.
Make a list of what these tools were used for and try and decide which of these tasks could be performed using a natural pebble.
Give reasons for your answer.
Some of these stone tools were used to cut meat and bone scrape bark from trees and hides animal skins chop fruit and roots.
Some may have been attached to handles of bone or wood to make spears and arrows for hunting.
Other tools were used to chop wood which was used as firewood.
Wood was also used to make huts and tools.
As stone tools were important people tried to find places where good quality stone was easily available.
Places where stone was found and where people made tools are known as factory sites.
How do we know where these factories were.
Usually we find blocks of stone tools that were made and perhaps discarded because they were not perfect and chips of waste stone left behind at these sites.
Sometimes people lived here for longer spells of time.
These sites are called habitation-cum-factory sites.
Around 12 000 years ago there were major changes in the climate of the world with a shift to relatively warm conditions.
In many areas this led to the development of grasslands.
This in turn How stone tools were made one of the two techniques is shown in the illustration.
Try and identify it.
led to an increase in the number of deer antelope goat sheep and cattle i.e.
animals that survived on grass.
Those who hunted these animals now followed them learning about their food habits and their breeding seasons.
It is likely that this helped people to start thinking about herding and rearing these animals themselves.
Fishing also became important.
This was also a time when several grain bearing grasses including wheat barley and rice grew naturally in different parts of the subcontinent.
Men women and children probably collected these grains as food and learnt where they grew and when they ripened.
This may have led them to think about growing plants on their own.
We have seen that the earliest people hunted gathered plant produce made stone tools and painted on cave walls.
Is there any way of finding out whether women hunted or men made stone tools whether women painted or men gathered fruits and nuts.
At present we do not really know.
However there are at least two possibilities.
It is likely that both men and women may have done many of these things together.
It is also possible that some tasks were done only by women and others only by men.
And again there could have been different practices in different parts of the subcontinent.
