Take a look at Maps 1 and 2.
Map 1 was made in 1154 CE by the Arab geographer Al-Idrisi.
The section reproduced here is a detail of the Indian subcontinent from his larger map of the world.
Map 2 was made in the 1720s by a French cartographer.
The two maps are quite different even though they are of the same area.
In al-Idrisi’s map, south India is where we would expect to find north India and Sri Lanka is the island at the top.
Place-names are marked in Arabic, and there are some well-known names like Kanauj in Uttar Pradesh (spelt in the map as Qanauj).
Map 2 was made nearly 600 years after Map 1, during which time information about the subcontinent had changed considerably.
This map seems more familiar to us and the coastal areas in particular are surprisingly detailed.
This map was used by European sailors and merchants on their voyages  Equally important is the fact that the science of cartography differed in the two periods.
When historians read documents, maps and texts from the past they have to be sensitive to the different historical backgrounds – the contexts – in which information about the past was produced.
If the context in which information is produced changes with time, what about language and meanings?
Historical records exist in a variety of languages which have changed considerably over the years.
Medieval Persian, for example, is different from modern Persian.
The difference is not just with regard to grammar and vocabulary; the meanings of words also change over time.
Take the term “Hindustan”, for example.
Today we understand it as “India”, the modern nation-state.
When the term was used in the thirteenth century by Minhaj-i-Siraj, a chronicler who wrote in Persian, he meant the areas of Punjab, Haryana and the lands between the Ganga and Yamuna.
He used the term in a political sense for lands that were a part of the dominions of the Delhi Sultan.
The areas included in this term shifted with the extent of the Sultanate but the term never included south India.
By contrast, in the early sixteenth century Babur used Hindustan to describe the geography, the fauna and the culture of the inhabitants of the subcontinent.
As we will see later in the chapter, this was somewhat similar to the way the fourteenth-century poet Amir Khusrau used the word “Hind”.
While the idea of a geographical and cultural entity like “India” did exist, the term “Hindustan” did not carry the political and national meanings which we associate with it today.
Historians today have to be careful about the terms they use because they meant different things in the past.
Take, for example, a simple term like “foreigner”.
It is used today to mean someone who is not an Indian.
In Can you think of any other words whose meanings change in different contexts?
?
TRACING CHANGES... OUR PASTS – II 4 the medieval period a “foreigner” was any stranger who appeared say in a given village, someone who was not a part of that society or culture.
(In Hindi the term pardesi might be used to describe such a person and in Persian, ajnabi.)
A city-dweller, therefore, might have regarded a forest-dweller as a “foreigner”, but two peasants living in the same village were not foreigners to each other, even though they may have had different religious or caste backgrounds.
Historians use different types of sources to learn about the past depending upon the period of their study and the nature of their investigation.
Last year, for example, you read about rulers of the Gupta dynasty and Harshavardhana.
In this book we will read about the following thousand years, from roughly 700 to 1750.
You will notice some continuity in the sources used by historians for the study of this period.
They still rely on coins, inscriptions, architecture and textual records for information.
But there is also considerable discontinuity.
The number and variety of textual records increased dramatically during this period.
They slowly displaced other types of available information.
Through this period paper gradually became cheaper and more widely available.
People used it to write holy texts, chronicles of rulers, letters and teachings of saints, petitions and judicial records, and for registers of accounts and taxes.
Manuscripts were collected by wealthy people, rulers, monasteries and temples.
They were placed in libraries and archives.
These manuscripts and documents provide a lot of detailed information to historians but they are also difficult to use.
There was no printing press in those days so scribes copied manuscripts by hand.
If you have ever copied a friend’s homework you would know that this is not a simple exercise.
Sometimes you cannot read your friend’s handwriting and are forced to guess what is written.
As a result there are small but significant differences in your copy of your friend’s work.
Manuscript copying is somewhat similar.
As scribes copied manuscripts, they also introduced small changes – a word here, a sentence there.
These small differences grew over centuries of copying until manuscripts of the same text became substantially different from one another.
This is a serious problem because we rarely find the original manuscript of the author today.
We are totally dependent upon the copies made by later scribes.
As a result historians have to read different manuscript versions of the same text to guess what the author had originally written.
On occasion authors revised their chronicles at different times.
The fourteenth-century chronicler Ziyauddin Barani wrote his chronicle first in 1356 and another version two years later.
The two differ from each other but historians did not know about the existence of the first version until the 1960s.
It remained lost in large library collections.
Throughout this period there was a gradual clearing of forests and the extension of agriculture, a change faster and more complete in some areas than in others.
Changes in their habitat forced many forest-dwellers to migrate.
Others started tilling the land and became peasants.
These new peasant groups gradually began to be influenced by regional markets, chieftains, priests, monasteries and temples.
They became part of large, complex societies, and were required to pay taxes and offer goods and services to local lords.
As a result, significant economic and social differences emerged amongst peasants.
Some possessed more productive land, others also kept cattle, and some combined artisanal work with agricultural activity during the lean season.
As society became more differentiated, people were grouped into jatis or sub-castes and ranked on the basis of their backgrounds and their occupations.
Ranks were not fixed permanently, and varied according to the power, influence and resources controlled by members of the jati.
The status of the same jati could vary from area to area.
Jatis framed their own rules and regulations to manage the conduct of their members.
These regulations were enforced by an assembly of elders, described in some areas as the jati panchayat.
But jatis were also required to follow the rules of their villages.
Several villages were governed by a chieftain.
Together they were only one small unit of a state.
Large states like those of the Cholas (Chapter 2), Tughluqs (Chapter 3) or Mughals (Chapter 4) encompassed many regions.
A Sanskrit prashasti (see Chapter 2 for an example of a prashasti ) praising the Delhi Sultan Ghiyasuddin Balban (1266-1287) explained that he was the ruler of a vast empire that stretched from Bengal (Gauda) in the east to Ghazni (Gajjana) in Afghanistan in the west and included all of south India (Dravida).
People of different regions – Gauda, Andhra, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat – apparently fled before his armies.
Historians regard these as exaggerated claims of conquests.
At the same time, they try to understand why rulers kept claiming to have control over different parts of the subcontinent.
When the Mughal Empire declined in the eighteenth century, it led to the re-emergence of regional states (Chapter 10).
But years of imperial, pan-regional rule had altered the character of the regions.
Across most of the subcontinent the regions were left with the legacies of the big and small states that had ruled over them.
This was apparent in the emergence of many distinct and shared traditions: in the realms of governance, the management of the economy, elite cultures, and language.
Through the thousand years between 700 and 1750 the character of the different regions did not grow in isolation.
These regions felt the impact of larger pan-regional forces of integration without ever quite losing their distinctiveness.
The thousand years of history that we are exploring witnessed major developments in religious traditions.
People’s belief in the divine was sometimes deeply personal, but more usually it was collective.
Collective belief in a supernatural agency – religion – was often closely connected with the social and economic organisation of local communities.
As the social worlds of these groups altered so too did their beliefs.
It was during this period that important changes occurred in what we call Hinduism today.
These included the worship of new deities, the construction of temples by royalty and the growing importance of Brahmanas, the priests, as dominant groups in society.
Their knowledge of Sanskrit texts earned the Brahmanas a lot of respect in society.
Their dominant position was consolidated by the support of their patrons – new rulers searching for prestige.
This was also the period when new religions appeared in the subcontinent.
Merchants and migrants first brought the teachings of the holy Quran to India in the seventh century.
Muslims regard the Quran as their holy book and accept the sovereignty of the one God, Allah, whose love, mercy and bounty embrace all those who believe in Him, without regard to social background.
Many rulers were patrons of Islam and the ulama – learned theologians and jurists.
And like Hinduism, Islam was interpreted in a variety of ways by its followers.
There were the Shia Muslims who believed that the Prophet Muhammad’s son-in-law, Ali, was the legitimate leader of the Muslim community, and the Sunni Muslims who accepted the authority of the early leaders (Khalifas) of the community, and the succeeding Khalifas.
There were other important differences between the various schools of law (Hanafi and Shafi’i mainly in India), and in theology and mystic traditions.
Historians do not see time just as a passing of hours, days or years – as a clock or a calendar.
Time also reflects changes in social and economic organisation, in the persistence and transformation of ideas and beliefs.
The study of time is made somewhat easier by dividing the past into large segments – periods – that possess shared characteristics.
In the middle of the nineteenth century British historians divided the history of India into three periods: “Hindu”, “Muslim” and “British”.
This division was based on the idea that the religion of rulers was the only important historical change, and that there were no other significant developments – in the economy, society or culture.
Such a division also ignored the rich diversity of the subcontinent.
Few historians follow this periodisation today.
Most look to economic and social factors to characterise the major elements of different moments of the past.
The histories you read last year included a wide range of early societies – hunter-gatherers, early farmers, people living in towns and villages, and early empires and kingdoms.
The histories you will be studying this year are often described as “medieval”.
You will find out more about the spread of peasant societies, the rise of regional and imperial state formations – sometimes at the cost of pastoral and forest people – the development of Hinduism and Islam as major religions and the arrival of European trading companies.
These thousand years of Indian history witnessed considerable change.
After all, the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries were quite different from the eighth or the eleventh.
Therefore, describing the entire period as one historical unit is not without its problems.
Moreover, the “medieval” period is often contrasted with the “modern” period.
“Modernity” carries with it a sense of material progress and intellectual advancement.
This seems to suggest that the medieval period was lacking in any change whatsoever.
But of course we know this was not the case.
During these thousand years the societies of the subcontinent were transformed often and economies in several regions reached a level of prosperity that attracted the interest of European trading companies.
As you read this book, look out for signs of change and the historical processes at work.
Also, whenever you can, compare what you read in this book with what you read last year.
Look out for changes and continuities wherever you can, and look at the world around you to see what else has changed or remained the same.
